---
layout: post
published: false
title: 'Rectangle Pre-Collision Detection in 2D'
date: '2020-07-05'
---
For the past few weeks I have been working on a 2D RPG written in C++ using [SFML](https://www.sfml-dev.org/). 

In writing collision detection, I came across a scenario where I wanted to detect a collsision before it actually happened. Think about an NPC car driving the streets of an RPG map. If the player is wandering around the streets of the map, it would be nice if the cars stopped before hitting the player. This is the functionality I set out to implement. 

*Note*: In this post, I will use the term *collision distance* to represent the minimum distance between two objects before a collision is detected (i.e. how close a car can be to the player before it stops).

Consider the scenario below:

```
  ─────▶        
┌────────┐      
│        │  ┌──┐
│        │◦◦│  │
│        │  └──┘
└────────┘      
    A        B
```
<small>Fig. 1</small>

In this example, the car,`A`, has a width of 10 units, and the player,`B`, has a width 4. The distance between the two objects is 2 units, and the *collision distance* is 1 unit. Also assume that `A` is moving to the right.

In *Figure 1* there would be no collision detected since the two objects are 2 units apart. Because `A` is moving to the right, we want to test the 

Thus, object A would move forward. If `A`'s speed was 9 units, then we have:

```
           ─────▶  
         ┌────────┐
         │  ┌──┐  │
◦◦◦◦◦◦◦◦◦│◦◦│  │◦◦│
         │  └──┘  │
         └────────┘
```
<small>Fig. 2</small>

Since `A` is moving to the right, we are testing the right hand side of `A` against the left hand side of `B`. 

```
bool collision = abs(A.right - B.left) <= collisionDistance
```

This will fail because the distance between `A.right` and `B.left` is 2, which is greater than our `collisionDistance` of 1, and thus no collision will be detected. 


However, even if `A` had only moved 8 units forward there is still a problem since we want to detect a collision **before** it actually happens






If `A` moves 4 unit

If we to a *pre-move* test, then the test will fail and object `A` will advance forward possibly either **past** or possibly **on top of** object `B`.